Add Firebase Functions hosting guide (#631)
grammyjs/website: site/docs/hosting/firebase.md

5. The CLI gives you two options for language support:
   - JavaScript
   - TypeScript

   For this tutorial, select TypeScript.

6. Optionally you can select ESLint
7. The CLI asks you if you want to install the dependencies with npm.
   If you use another package manager like `yarn` or `pnpm` you can decline.
   In that case you have to cd into the `functions` directory and install the dependencies manually.
8. open `./functions/package.json` and look for the key: `"engines": {"node": "16"}`.
   The node version should match your installed version of node.
   Otherwise the project might not run.

## Preparing Your Code

You can use this short example bot as a starting point:

```ts
import * as functions from "firebase-functions";
import {webhookCallback, Bot} from "grammy";

const bot = new Bot(<BOT_TOKEN>);

bot.command("start", (ctx) => ctx.reply("Welcome! Up and running."));
bot.command("ping", (ctx) => ctx.reply(`Pong! ${new Date()}`));

//you can trigger your function on https://localhost/<firebase-projectname>/us-central1/helloworld during development 
export const helloWorld = functions.https.onRequest(webhookCallback(bot));
```

> ## Development

Reviewer: What if we move this development section after the deployment section?

Author: Not to judge from me to others, but i would only discover the development section after having deployed the function 500 times to test it :).
 The firebase docs also have this order and i think it makes sense, since you first develop and than deploy.

Reviewer 2: I agree with @gertminov.

> ```

after the emulators started you should find a line in the console output, that looks like this:

```shell
+  functions[us-central1-helloWorld]: http function initialized (http://127.0.0.1:5001/<firebase-projectname>/us-central1/helloWorld).
```

This is the local url of your cloud function.
Right now, your function is only available to the localhost (your computer).
To actually test your bot, you need to expose your function to the internet, so that the Telegram API can send updates to your bot.\
There are several services like [localtunnel](https://localtunnel.me/) or [ngrok](https://ngrok.com/) that can help you with that.
Let's go with localtunnel, because it does not shut down after an hour, if you don't give them money like ngrok does.
First let's install localtunnel:

```shell
npm i -g localtunnel
```

After that we can expose the port `5001` to the internet:

```shell
lt --port 5001
```

The local tunnel should give you a unique url like `https://modern-heads-sink-80-132-166-120.loca.lt`

All that's left to do is to tell Telegram where to send the updates.
You can do this by calling setWebhook.
For example, open a new tab in your browser and visit this URL:

> ```text:no-line-numbers
> https://api.telegram.org/bot<BOT_TOKEN>/setWebhook?url=https://modern-heads-sink-80-132-166-120.loca.lt/hotsouceservice/us-central1/deleteImage
> ```
> 
> Replace <BOT_TOKEN> with your real bot token, and the `.loca.lt` url with you own url you got from localtunnel.

Reviewer: ````suggestion
I am not sure about the URL. Can you confirm if this revision is correct?

```text:no-line-numbers
https://api.telegram.org/bot<BOT_TOKEN>/setWebhook?url=<LT_URL>
```

Replace <BOT_TOKEN> with your real bot token and <LT_URL> with your own URL that you received from localtunnel.
````

Author: You have to append the path to your firebase function (/hotsouceservice/us-central1/helloworld) to the localtunnel url, since that only maps to PORT 5001. But i added the wrong function call at the end of the url anyways, so i'll update that.

You should now see this in your browser window.

```json:no-line-numbers
{
  "ok": true,
  "result": true,
  "description": "Webhook was set"
}
```

> Done! Your bot is working now.
> Head over to Telegram and watch it respond to messages!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Your bot is now ready for deployment testing.
```

## Deploying

> You can follow Step 8. of the [get started guide](https://firebase.google.com/docs/functions/get-started#deploy-functions-to-a-production-environment)

Reviewer: We could write the steps in this doc, similar to how we did in the Setup section.

Author: ah yeah, that makes sense. I'll write it out :)

> Your firebase function is now working.
> All that's left to do is to tell Telegram where to send the updates.
> You can do this by calling setWebhook.
> For example, open a new tab in your browser and visit this URL:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After deploying, you need to tell Telegram where to send updates to your bot by calling the `setWebhook` method.
To do this, open a new browser tab and visit this URL:
```

```text:no-line-numbers
https://api.telegram.org/bot<BOT_TOKEN>/setWebhook?url=https://<REGION>.<MY_PROJECT>.cloudfunctions.net/helloworld
```

> Replace <BOT_TOKEN> with your real bot token.
> Replace <REGION> with the name of the region you chose to deploy your function to. Replace <PROJECT_NAME> with the name of your firebase project.
> The firebase CLI should give you the whole URL to your cloud function, so you can just paste it after the `?url=`
> 
> You should now see this in your browser window.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Replace <BOT_TOKEN> with your actual bot token, <REGION> with the name of the region where you deployed your function, and <MY_PROJECT> with the name of your Firebase project.
The Firebase CLI should provide you with the full URL of your cloud function, so you can simply paste it after the `?url=` parameter in the `setWebhook` method.

If everything is set up correctly, you should see this response in your browser window:
```

```json:no-line-numbers
{
  "ok": true,
  "result": true,
  "description": "Webhook was set"
}
```

> Done! Your bot is working now.
> Head over to Telegram and watch it respond to messages!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
That's it!
Your bot is ready to go.
Head over to Telegram and watch it respond to messages!
```

### 1. Create A Firebase Project

1. Go to the [Firebase Console](https://console.firebase.google.com/) and click **Add Project**.
2. If prompted, review and accept the Firebase terms.
3. Click **Continue**.
4. Uncheck the analytics.
5. Click **Create Project**.

### 2. Setup Node.js and Firebase CLI

To write functions and deploy them to the Cloud Functions runtime, you'll need to set up a Node.js environment and install the Firebase CLI.

> It's important to note that only Node.js versions 14, 16, and 18 are currently supported by Firebase Functions.
> For more information on Node.js version support, please refer to [Set Node.js version](https://firebase.google.com/docs/functions/manage-functions#set_nodejs_version) section in their docs.

Once you have Node.js and npm installed, install the Firebase CLI via your preferred method. To install the CLI via npm, use:

```shell
npm install -g firebase-tools
```

### 3. Initialize The Project

1. Run `firebase login` to log in via the browser and authenticate the Firebase CLI.
2. Go to your Firebase project directory.

> 3. Run `firebase init functions`, and type `y` when asked, whether you want to initialize a new codebase

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. Run `firebase init functions`, and type `y` when asked whether you want to initialize a new codebase.
```

4. Choose `use existing project` and select the project you created in Step 1.
5. The CLI gives you two options for language support:
   - JavaScript
   - TypeScript

   For this tutorial, select TypeScript.

> 6. Optionally you can select ESLint

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
6. Optionally, you can select ESLint.
```

7. The CLI asks you if you want to install the dependencies with npm.
   If you use another package manager like `yarn` or `pnpm` you can decline.

>    In that case you have to cd into the `functions` directory and install the dependencies manually.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   In that case, you have to `cd` into the `functions` directory and install the dependencies manually.
```

8. open `./functions/package.json` and look for the key: `"engines": {"node": "16"}`.

>    The node version should match your installed version of node.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   The `node` version should match your installed version of Node.js.
```

   Otherwise, the project might not run.

## Preparing Your Code

You can use this short example bot as a starting point:

```ts
import * as functions from "firebase-functions";
import {webhookCallback, Bot} from "grammy";

> const bot = new Bot(<BOT_TOKEN>);

Reviewer 2: We can make this consistent with what we use on the landing page.
```suggestion
const bot = new Bot(""); // <-- put your bot token here (https://t.me/BotFather)
```

bot.command("start", (ctx) => ctx.reply("Welcome! Up and running."));
bot.command("ping", (ctx) => ctx.reply(`Pong! ${new Date()}`));

//you can trigger your function on https://localhost/<firebase-projectname>/us-central1/helloworld during development 
export const helloWorld = functions.https.onRequest(webhookCallback(bot));
```

## Development

> During development you can use the firebase emulator suite to run your code locally, which is way faster than deploying every change to firebase.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
During development, you can use the firebase emulator suite to run your code locally.
This is way faster than deploying every change to Firebase.
```

To install the emulators run:

```shell
firebase init emulators
```

> The functions emulator should be select already, if not navigate to it using the arrow keys, and select it using `space`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The functions emulator should be selected already.
(If it isn't, navigate to it using the arrow keys, and select it using `space`.)
```

Let's go with localtunnel, because it does not shut down after an hour, if you don't give them money like ngrok does.
First let's install localtunnel:

```shell
npm i -g localtunnel
```

After that we can expose the port `5001` to the internet:

```shell
lt --port 5001
```

The local tunnel should give you a unique url like `https://modern-heads-sink-80-132-166-120.loca.lt`

All that's left to do is to tell Telegram where to send the updates.
You can do this by calling setWebhook.
For example, open a new tab in your browser and visit this URL:

```text:no-line-numbers
https://api.telegram.org/bot<BOT_TOKEN>/setWebhook?url=https://modern-heads-sink-80-132-166-120.loca.lt/hotsouceservice/us-central1/deleteImage
```

Replace <BOT_TOKEN> with your real bot token, and the `.loca.lt` url with you own url you got from localtunnel.

You should now see this in your browser window.

```json:no-line-numbers
{
  "ok": true,
  "result": true,
  "description": "Webhook was set"
}
```

Done! Your bot is working now.
Head over to Telegram and watch it respond to messages!

## Deploying

> To deploy your function just run:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To deploy your function, just run:
```

> ```shell

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```sh
```

firebase deploy
```

The Firebase CLI will give you the url of your function once the deployment is completed.
It should look something like `https://<REGIO>.<MY_PROJECT.cloudfunctions.net/helloWorld`.
For a more detailed explanation you can take a look at step 8. of the [get started guide](https://firebase.google.com/docs/functions/get-started#deploy-functions-to-a-production-environment).

After deploying, you need to tell Telegram where to send updates to your bot by calling the `setWebhook` method.
To do this, open a new browser tab and visit this URL:

```text:no-line-numbers
https://api.telegram.org/bot<BOT_TOKEN>/setWebhook?url=https://<REGION>.<MY_PROJECT>.cloudfunctions.net/helloworld
```

> Replace <BOT_TOKEN> with your actual bot token, <REGION> with the name of the region where you deployed your function, and <MY_PROJECT> with the name of your Firebase project.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Replace `<BOT_TOKEN>` with your actual bot token, `<REGION>` with the name of the region where you deployed your function, and `<MY_PROJECT>` with the name of your Firebase project.
```

```sh
npm install -g firebase-tools
```

### Initializing the Project

1. Run `firebase login` to open your browser and authenticate Firebase CLI with your account.
2. `cd` into your project's directory.
3. Run `firebase init functions`, and type `y` when asked whether you want to initialize a new codebase.
4. Choose `use existing project` and select the project you created in Step 1.
5. The CLI gives you two options for language support:
   - JavaScript
   - TypeScript
6. Optionally, you can select ESLint.
7. The CLI asks you if you want to install the dependencies with npm.
   If you use another package manager like `yarn` or `pnpm` you can decline.
   In that case, you have to `cd` into the `functions` directory and install the dependencies manually.
8. Open `./functions/package.json` and look for the key: `"engines": {"node": "16"}`.
   The `node` version should match your installed version of Node.js.
   Otherwise, the project might not run.

## Preparing Your Code

You can use this short example bot as a starting point:

```ts
import * as functions from "firebase-functions";
import { Bot, webhookCallback } from "grammy";

> const bot = new Bot(""); // <-- put your bot token here (https://t.me/BotFather)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
const bot = new Bot(""); // <-- put your bot token here
```

Reviewer 2: If we remove the link to where people can get their token, then we should add a paragraph the describes this. Should I add that?

Reviewer 3: No, don’t.

Reviewer 2: Let's merge this as-is and take care of it in #664 then

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
const bot = new Bot(""); // <-- put your bot token between the ""
```

bot.command("start", (ctx) => ctx.reply("Welcome! Up and running."));
bot.command("ping", (ctx) => ctx.reply(`Pong! ${new Date()}`));

> // During development, you can trigger your function at https://localhost/<firebase-projectname>/us-central1/helloworld

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
// During development, you can trigger your function from https://localhost/<firebase-projectname>/us-central1/helloworld.
```

To install the emulators, run:

```sh
firebase init emulators
```

The functions emulator should be selected already.
(If it isn't, navigate to it using the arrow keys, and select it using `space`.)
For the questions about which port to use for each emulator, simply press `enter`.

To start the emulators and run your code, use:

```sh
npm run serve
```

::: tip
For some reason the standard configuration of the npm script does not start the TypeScript compiler in watch mode.
Therefore, if you use TypeScript, you also have to run:

```sh
npm run build:watch
```

:::

After the emulators start, you should find a line in the console output that looks like this:

```sh
+  functions[us-central1-helloWorld]: http function initialized (http://127.0.0.1:5001/<firebase-projectname>/us-central1/helloWorld).
```

That is the local URL of your cloud function.
However, your function is only available to the localhost on your computer.
To actually test your bot, you need to expose your function to the internet so that the Telegram API can send updates to your bot.
There are several services, such as [localtunnel](https://localtunnel.me) or [ngrok](https://ngrok.com), that can help you with that.

> In this example, we will use localtunnel, as it does not shut down after an hour like ngrok does.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In this example, we will be using localtunnel.
```

First, let's install localtunnel:

```sh
npm i -g localtunnel
```

After that, you can expose the port `5001` to the internet:

```sh
lt --port 5001
```

> localtunnel should give you a unique URL, such as `https://modern-heads-sink-80-132-166-120.loca.lt`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
localtunnel should give you a unique URL, such as `https://modern-heads-sink-80-132-166-120.loca.lt`.
```

> All that's left to do is to tell Telegram where to send the updates.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
All that's left to do is to tell Telegram where to send updates to.
```

Reviewer 2: Prepositions are not words to end sentences with. The existing sentence is better.

> You can do this by calling setWebhook.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can do this by calling `setWebhook`.
```

For example, open a new tab in your browser and visit this URL:

```text:no-line-numbers

> https://api.telegram.org/bot<BOT_TOKEN>/setWebhook?url=<LT_URL>/<firebase-projectname>/us-central1/helloWorld
> ```
> 
> Replace `<BOT_TOKEN>` with your real bot token, and `<LT_URL>` with your own URL you received from localtunnel.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
https://api.telegram.org/bot<BOT_TOKEN>/setWebhook?url=<WEBHOOK_URL>/<firebase-projectname>/us-central1/helloWorld
```

Replace `<BOT_TOKEN>` with your real bot token, and `<WEBHOOK_URL>` with your own URL you got from localtunnel.
```

> Replace `<BOT_TOKEN>` with your real bot token, and `<LT_URL>` with your own URL you received from localtunnel.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Replace `<BOT_TOKEN>` with your real bot token, and `<WEBHOOK_URL>` with your own URL you got from localtunnel.
```

It should look something like `https://<REGION>.<MY_PROJECT.cloudfunctions.net/helloWorld`.
For a more detailed explanation you can take a look at step 8. of the [get started guide](https://firebase.google.com/docs/functions/get-started#deploy-functions-to-a-production-environment).

After deploying, you need to tell Telegram where to send updates to your bot by calling the `setWebhook` method.
To do this, open a new browser tab and visit this URL:

```text:no-line-numbers
https://api.telegram.org/bot<BOT_TOKEN>/setWebhook?url=https://<REGION>.<MY_PROJECT>.cloudfunctions.net/helloworld
```

Replace `<BOT_TOKEN>` with your actual bot token, `<REGION>` with the name of the region where you deployed your function, and `<MY_PROJECT>` with the name of your Firebase project.
The Firebase CLI should provide you with the full URL of your cloud function, so you can simply paste it after the `?url=` parameter in the `setWebhook` method.

If everything is set up correctly, you should see this response in your browser window:

```json:no-line-numbers
{
  "ok": true,
  "result": true,
  "description": "Webhook was set"
}
```

> That's it!
> Your bot is ready to go.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
That's it, your bot is ready to go.
```

2. If prompted, review and accept the Firebase terms.
3. Click **Continue**.
4. Decide on whether you want to share analytics or not.
5. Click **Create Project**.

### Setting Things Up

To write functions and deploy them to the Firebase Functions runtime, you'll need to set up a Node.js environment and install the Firebase CLI.

> It's important to note that only the Node.js versions 14, 16, and 18 are currently supported by Firebase Functions.
> For more on the supported Node.js versions, refer to [here](https://firebase.google.com/docs/functions/manage-functions#set_nodejs_version).

Once you have Node.js and NPM installed, install Firebase CLI globally:

```sh
npm install -g firebase-tools
```

### Initializing the Project

1. Run `firebase login` to open your browser and authenticate Firebase CLI with your account.
2. `cd` into your project's directory.
3. Run `firebase init functions`, and type `y` when asked whether you want to initialize a new codebase.
4. Choose `use existing project` and select the project you created in Step 1.
5. The CLI gives you two options for language support:
   - JavaScript
   - TypeScript

> 
>    For this tutorial, you can select either.
> 

Reviewer 2: So
```suggestion
```
?

Reviewer 2: I agree with you. I think we're done here. This tutorial is an excellent piece of work and I don't feel like dragging it out further. I'll just commit this now and let @roj1512 revert in case I misunderstood :)

Author: wonderfull, thank you :)

# Hosting: Firebase Functions

> This tutorial will guide you through the process of deploying your bot to [Firebase](https://firebase.google.com) using [Firebase Serverless Functions](https://firebase.google.com/docs/functions).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This tutorial will guide you through the process of deploying your bot to [Firebase Functions](https://firebase.google.com/docs/functions).
```

Author: I would keep the `Firebase` part, since it gives a link to the actual firebase website

## Prerequisites

> To follow this tutorial, you will need a Google account.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To follow along, you will need to have a Google account.
```

> If you don't have one, you can [create one here](https://accounts.google.com/signup).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If you don't already have one, you can [create one here](https://accounts.google.com/signup).
```

## Setup

> This section will guide you through the setup process.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This section guides you through the setup process.
```

If you need more detailed explanations on each step that you'll take, refer to the [official Firebase documentation](https://firebase.google.com/docs/functions/get-started).

> ### Create a Firebase Project

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Creating a Firebase Project
```

> If you need a more detailed explanation of each step, you can refer to the [official Firebase documentation](https://firebase.google.com/docs/functions/get-started).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If you need more detailed explanations on each step, you can refer to the [official Firebase documentation](https://firebase.google.com/docs/functions/get-started).
```

> 1. Go to the [Firebase Console](https://console.firebase.google.com/) and click **Add Project**.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. Go to [Firebase Console](https://console.firebase.google.com/) and click **Add Project**.
```

Author: `Firebase Console` is a thing, semantically speaking (even though it is a website), so i would  prefer to keep the `the`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. Go to the [Firebase console](https://console.firebase.google.com/) and click **Add Project**.
```

2. If prompted, review and accept the Firebase terms.
3. Click **Continue**.

> 4. Uncheck the analytics.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
4. Decide on whether you want to share analytics or not.
```

5. Click **Create Project**.

### Setup Node.js and Firebase CLI

To write functions and deploy them to the Cloud Functions runtime, you'll need to set up a Node.js environment and install the Firebase CLI.

> > It's important to note that only Node.js versions 14, 16, and 18 are currently supported by Firebase Functions.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
> It's important to note that only the Node.js versions 14, 16, and 18 are currently supported by Firebase Functions.
```

> For more information on Node.js version support, please refer to [Set Node.js version](https://firebase.google.com/docs/functions/manage-functions#set_nodejs_version) section in their docs.

> Once you have Node.js and npm installed, you can install the Firebase CLI using your preferred method.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Once you have Node.js and NPM installed, install Firebase CLI globally:
```

To install it via npm, use the following command in your terminal:

```sh
npm install -g firebase-tools
```

> ### Initialize The Project

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Initializing the Project
```

> 1. Run `firebase login` to log in via the browser and authenticate the Firebase CLI.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. Run `firebase login` to open your browser and authenticate Firebase CLI.
```

Author: The Browser opens automatically and asks for your credentials / which account to use, if you are already logged in your google account

> 2. Go to your Firebase project directory.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
2. `cd` into your project's directory.
```

3. Run `firebase init functions`, and type `y` when asked whether you want to initialize a new codebase.
4. Choose `use existing project` and select the project you created in Step 1.
5. The CLI gives you two options for language support:
   - JavaScript
   - TypeScript

>    For this tutorial, select TypeScript.

Reviewer 3: Do they really have to use TypeScript to follow this tutorial? I don’t see any TypeScript-only syntax in the code example.

Author: No, but since the [grammy introduction](https://grammy.dev/guide/introduction.html#prerequisites-to-getting-started) states that the bots are written in  Typescipt I thought it would be good to continue this trend.

Reviewer 2: I agree that we should encourage users to use TS. @roj1512 do you mean that we should make it clear that both JS and TS work but we _recommend_ TS?

Reviewer 3: No, I mean we should not say select TypeScript, or JavaScript. Let the user chose independently.

Reviewer 2: Alright.

Reviewer 3: Our code example works with both anyway.

Author: updated it, to let the user choose

In this example, we will use localtunnel, as it does not shut down after an hour like ngrok does.

First, let's install localtunnel:

```sh
npm i -g localtunnel
```

After that, you can expose the port `5001` to the internet:

```sh
lt --port 5001
```

localtunnel should give you a unique URL, such as `https://modern-heads-sink-80-132-166-120.loca.lt`

All that's left to do is to tell Telegram where to send the updates.
You can do this by calling setWebhook.
For example, open a new tab in your browser and visit this URL:

```text:no-line-numbers
https://api.telegram.org/bot<BOT_TOKEN>/setWebhook?url=<LT_URL>/<firebase-projectname>/us-central1/helloWorld
```

Replace `<BOT_TOKEN>` with your real bot token, and `<LT_URL>` with your own URL you received from localtunnel.

You should now see this in your browser window.

```json:no-line-numbers
{
  "ok": true,
  "result": true,
  "description": "Webhook was set"
}
```

Your bot is now ready for deployment testing.

## Deploying

To deploy your function, just run:

```sh
firebase deploy
```

The Firebase CLI will give you the url of your function once the deployment is completed.

> It should look something like `https://<REGIO>.<MY_PROJECT.cloudfunctions.net/helloWorld`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It should look something like `https://<REGION>.<MY_PROJECT.cloudfunctions.net/helloWorld`.
```

# Hosting: Firebase Functions

> This tutorial will guide you on how to deploy your bot to [firebase](https://firebase.google.com/) by using [Firebase Serverless Functions](https://firebase.google.com/docs/functions), assuming that you already have a firebase account.

Reviewer 3: Don’t assume that the user already has a Firebase account. Guide them on how to create one instead.

## Setup

In order to deploy a firebase function, you will need to create a firebase account, install their CLI, and create a firebase project.
You should first [follow their documentation](https://firebase.google.com/docs/functions/get-started) to set things up.

> > You can ommit steps 4 to 6 since they are just examples. It is usefull though to set up the emulators (step 7) to test your code locally.

Author: I redid the setup as a list. But still refering to the docs on the firebase website. My reasoning was, that if they change somehting this document does not become outdated.  Should i just put everything in  this document?

> > You can ommit steps 4 to 6 since they are just examples. It is usefull though to set up the emulators (step 7) to test your code locally.

Reviewer: We can write down the reference link in addition to explaining the steps. No need to worry if there are changes in the future, we can simply update this doc if that happens.

## Preparing Your Code

You can use this short example bot as a starting point

```ts
import * as functions from "firebase-functions";
import {webhookCallback, Bot} from "grammy";

const bot = new Bot(<BOT_TOKEN>);

bot.command("start", (ctx) => ctx.reply("Welcome! Up and running."));
bot.command("ping", (ctx) => ctx.reply(`Pong! ${new Date()}`));

> //you can trigger your function on https://<domain>/<firebase-projectname>/helloworld

Reviewer: Please elaborate on what you mean by trigger the function.

Also, the links here look different from the ones in the Deploying section: `https://<domain>/<firebase-projectname>/helloworld` vs `<https://<REGION>.<MY_PROJECT>.cloudfunctions.net/helloworld>`. Are both links unrelated?

Author: The url structure for the emulated firebase is different from the deployed one for some reason.
I specified in the comment that this is for development now

> export const helloWorld = functions.https.onRequest(webhookCallback(bot))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
export const helloWorld = functions.https.onRequest(webhookCallback(bot));
```

```

## Deploying

You can follow Step 8. of the [get started guide](https://firebase.google.com/docs/functions/get-started#deploy-functions-to-a-production-environment)

Your firebase function is now working. All that's left to do is to tell Telegram where to send the updates. You can do this by calling setWebhook. For example, open a new tab in your browser and visit this URL:

https://api.telegram.org/bot<BOT_TOKEN>/setWebhook?url=https://<REGION>.<MY_PROJECT>.cloudfunctions.net/helloworld

Replace <BOT_TOKEN> with your real bot token. Replace <REGION> with the name of the region you chose to deploy your function to. Replace <PROJECT_NAME> with the name of your firebase project.
The firebase CLI should give you the whole URL so you can just paste it after the `?url=`

You should now see this in your browser window.

> { "ok": true, "result": true, "description": "Webhook was set" }

Reviewer: ````suggestion
```json:no-line-numbers
{
  "ok": true,
  "result": true,
  "description": "Webhook was set"
}
```
````

> Done! Your bot is working now. Head over to Telegram and watch it respond to messages!

Reviewer: Each sentence should be placed on a new line.

## Prerequisites

1. Google account (you can [create one here](https://accounts.google.com/signup)).

## Setup

1. [Create a firebase projet](https://firebase.google.com/docs/functions/get-started#create-a-firebase-project)
2. [Install firebase cli](https://firebase.google.com/docs/functions/get-started#set-up-node.js-and-the-firebase-cli)
3. [Initialize the project](https://firebase.google.com/docs/functions/get-started#initialize-your-project). You don't have to run step 3. in their docs (`firebase init firestore`). Thats for the their database.
4. [set up the firebase emulator](https://firebase.google.com/docs/functions/get-started#emulate-execution-of-your-functions) to run your cloud function locally.

## Preparing Your Code

You can use this short example bot as a starting point:

```ts
import * as functions from "firebase-functions";
import {webhookCallback, Bot} from "grammy";

const bot = new Bot(<BOT_TOKEN>);

bot.command("start", (ctx) => ctx.reply("Welcome! Up and running."));
bot.command("ping", (ctx) => ctx.reply(`Pong! ${new Date()}`));

> //you can trigger your function on https://localhost/<firebase-projectname>/us-central1/helloworld during development 

Reviewer: Hmm... I still can't understand it. This doesn't clarify the meaning of the previous statement. Maybe we can create a new paragraph on what it means to trigger a function and why it needs to be done.

Author: ah ok, how about "every time you call the url https.//localhost/..... the function will bei executed.
 And additionally  a paragraph explaining how to trigger the function with the telegram bot api  during development (i.e. using ngrok or something to expose the localhost port and setting the webhook)

Reviewer: Sounds good!

export const helloWorld = functions.https.onRequest(webhookCallback(bot));
```

## Deploying

You can follow Step 8. of the [get started guide](https://firebase.google.com/docs/functions/get-started#deploy-functions-to-a-production-environment)

> Your firebase function is now working. All that's left to do is to tell Telegram where to send the updates. You can do this by calling setWebhook. For example, open a new tab in your browser and visit this URL:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Your firebase function is now working.
All that's left to do is to tell Telegram where to send the updates.
You can do this by calling setWebhook.
For example, open a new tab in your browser and visit this URL:
```

> `https://api.telegram.org/bot<BOT_TOKEN>/setWebhook?url=https://<REGION>.<MY_PROJECT>.cloudfunctions.net/helloworld`

Reviewer: ````suggestion
```text:no-line-numbers
https://api.telegram.org/bot<BOT_TOKEN>/setWebhook?url=https://<REGION>.<MY_PROJECT>.cloudfunctions.net/helloworld
```
````

Replace <BOT_TOKEN> with your real bot token.

> Replace <REGION> with the name of the region you chose to deploy your function to. Replace <PROJECT_NAME> with the name of your firebase project.\

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Replace <REGION> with the name of the region you chose to deploy your function to. Replace <PROJECT_NAME> with the name of your firebase project.
```

The firebase CLI should give you the whole URL to your cloud function, so you can just paste it after the `?url=`

You should now see this in your browser window.

```json:no-line-numbers
{
  "ok": true,
  "result": true,
  "description": "Webhook was set"
}
```

> Done! Your bot is working now.\

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Done! Your bot is working now.
```

   - JavaScript
   - TypeScript

>    For this tutorial, you can select either.

Reviewer 3: Remove this completely.
